---
layout: post
title: Object-Oriented Programming (OOP's) in Python 
date: 2024-06-11 10:14:00-0400
description: This blog provides an introduction to Object Oriented Programming and familiarises you with it's syntax in Python
tags: OOPs Python 
categories: Programming-101
read_time: 40
giscus_comments: false
related_posts: false
tabs: true
---

### Introduction 
Naturally the first question that would come to your mind is <b> Why should I learn about Object Oriented Programming ? Why should I break my head around learning what are Classes and Objects ? </b>. Let me illustrate the benefits of OOPs with a few examples: 

- Imagine you are a **Game Developer** and you are building a racing game where multiple cars move, accelerate, and crash differently. Instead of writing separate chunks of code for each car, you can create a **Car class** — a single blueprint that defines what a car is and how it behaves. Every car in your game then becomes an object created from that class, each with its own color, speed, and handling.

- Imagine you are a **Data Scientist**, you often work with datasets where you are cleaning, analysing, and visualizing them. By using OOP, you can design a **DataProcessor class** that encapsulates all your data operations, such as reading files, filtering noise and plotting graphs. Whenever you start a new project you can just reuse or extend that class, saving time and keeping your workflow consistent.

- Imagine you are a **Software Developer** where suppose you are building an application with multiple user roles — admin, editor, viewer, etc. Using OOP, you can define a **User class** that holds all common functionalities (such as login, logout, and profile management) and then create **subclasses** that add role specific behaviors. This makes your code modular, readable, and easier to maintain.

> Object Oriented Programming allows us to group related data and functions together into logical units much like how we organize the real world into objects. When you start seeing repeating patterns or structures in your code, OOP lets you capture them as blueprints (classes) and build upon them efficiently.

I hope now you have the motivation to learn more about <b>OOP</b>. Learning these concepts will help you develop elegant solutions to complex problems.

### Practical Object Oriented Programming in Python 
The notebook below takes you through the key concepts of Object Oriented Programming one at a time, providing explanations alongside practical code demonstrations. It builds up from scratch and then explains the 4 pillars of OOP.

{::nomarkdown}
{% assign jupyter_path = "assets/jupyter/OOPS.ipynb" | relative_url %}
{% capture notebook_exists %}{% file_exists assets/jupyter/blog.ipynb %}{% endcapture %}
{% if notebook_exists == "true" %}
{% jupyter_notebook jupyter_path %}
{% else %}

<p>Sorry, the notebook you are looking for does not exist.</p>
{% endif %}
{:/nomarkdown}



#### Conclusion 
I hope you now have some basic understanding of how OOP works, initially i was going to cover the **SOLID Principles** in this blog but given that it is already quite dense will redirect you to look into them here <a href="https://www.digitalocean.com/community/conceptual-articles/s-o-l-i-d-the-first-five-principles-of-object-oriented-design">SOLID principles of Object Oriented Design</a>. 

While knowing OOPs teaches you how to structure code using classes and objects **SOLID principles** teach you how to design them well.
They help you write cleaner, more flexible, and maintainable OOP code that scales without becoming messy or fragile.

### References
This blog was initially inspired from Corey Schafer youtube playlist on OOP, the initially examples are all taken from his videos. The addition of 4 pillars of OOPs and tweaking of the examples for these topics was done by yours truly : ) Apart from just the playlist a couple of other resources were used to help me articulate this blog:

- <a href="https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL-osiE80TeTsqhIuOqKhwlXsIBIdSeYtc">Corey Schafer OOPs Playlist</a>

- <a href="https://www.pythontutorial.net/python-oop/">Python Tutorials net</a>

- <a href="https://www.freecodecamp.org/news/object-oriented-programming-in-python/">Free Code Camp OOPs</a>

- <a href="https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/python/encapsulation-in-python/">Encapsulation in Python</a>

- <a href="https://medium.com/data-bistrot/abstraction-in-python-oop-c4da042f9eaf">Abstraction in Python</a>
